% !TeX program = pdfLaTeX
\documentclass[smallextended]{svjour3}       % onecolumn (second format)
%\documentclass[twocolumn]{svjour3}          % twocolumn
%
\smartqed  % flush right qed marks, e.g. at end of proof
%
\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}

\usepackage[hyphens]{url} % not crucial - just used below for the URL
\usepackage{hyperref}
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}

%
% \usepackage{mathptmx}      % use Times fonts if available on your TeX system
%
% insert here the call for the packages your document requires
%\usepackage{latexsym}
% etc.
%
% please place your own definitions here and don't use \def but
% \newcommand{}{}
%
% Insert the name of "your journal" with
% \journalname{myjournal}
%

%% load any required packages here
\usepackage{caption}
\usepackage{ltablex}
\usepackage{lscape}
\usepackage{multirow}




\begin{document}

\title{Open source landscape ecology tools \thanks{Grants or other notes
about the article that should go on the front page should be placed
here. General acknowledgments should be placed at the end of the
article.} }



\author{  Maximillian H.K. Hesselbarth \and  Jakub Nowosad \and  Author
3 \and  \ldots{} \and  }


\institute{
        Maximillian H.K. Hesselbarth \at
     Department of Ecosystem Modelling, University of Goettingen,
Buesgenweg 4, 37077 Goettingen, Germany \\
     \email{\href{mailto:maximilian.hesselbarth@uni-goettingen.de}{\nolinkurl{maximilian.hesselbarth@uni-goettingen.de}}}  %  \\
%             \emph{Present address:} of F. Author  %  if needed
    \and
        Jakub Nowosad \at
     Institute of Geoecology and Geoinformation, Adam Mickiewicz
University, Krygowskiego 10, 61-680 Poznan, Poland \\
     \email{\href{mailto:nowosad.jakub@gmail.com}{\nolinkurl{nowosad.jakub@gmail.com}}}  %  \\
%             \emph{Present address:} of F. Author  %  if needed
    \and
        Author 3 \at
     Adress author 3 \\
     \email{E-Mail author 3}  %  \\
%             \emph{Present address:} of F. Author  %  if needed
    \and
        \ldots{} \at
     \ldots{} \\
     \email{\ldots{}}  %  \\
%             \emph{Present address:} of F. Author  %  if needed
    \and
    }

\date{Received: date / Accepted: date}
% The correct dates will be entered by the editor


\maketitle

\begin{abstract}
max. (200 words) Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract
Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract
Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract
Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract
Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract
Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract
Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract
Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract
Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract
Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract
Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract
Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract
Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract Abstract
\\
\keywords{
        keyword 1 \and
        keyword 2 \and
        keyword 3 \and
        keyword 4 \and
        \ldots{} \and
    }


\end{abstract}


\def\spacingset#1{\renewcommand{\baselinestretch}%
{#1}\small\normalsize} \spacingset{1}


\hypertarget{sec:intro}{%
\section{Introduction}\label{sec:intro}}

\hypertarget{sec:landscape_ecology}{%
\subsection{A short introduction to landscape
ecology}\label{sec:landscape_ecology}}

Landscape ecology focuses on how ecological processes are influenced and
modified by the heterogeneous landscapes they occur in and
simultaneously how the ecological processes themselves influence the
landscapes \cite{Turner1989,Turner2005,With2019}. In this context,
landscape ecology considers, besides others, i) spatial and temporal
dynamics of heterogeneous landscapes, ii) interactions, fluxes and
exchange within these landscapes, iii) how the landscapes influence
ecological processes (and vice versa) and lastly iv) how to manage these
heterogeneous landscapes \cite{Risser1984,Turner1989}.

While human activities have altered the landscapes for millenniums
\cite{Ellis2011,Ellis2015}, in the past centuries the effects of humans
on landscapes have increased to an unknown high, known as the the
Anthropocene \cite{Crutzen2002}. Today, almost all landscapes are
directly or indirectly influenced by human activities
\cite{Vitousek1997}. Thus, understanding the complex interactions
between landscapes and ecological processes becomes increasingly
important \cite{With2019}.

Because landscapes are defined as mosaics of different land covers,
ecosystems, habitat types, or land uses
\cite{Forman1986,Forman1995,Wiens1995}, spatial context is important and
ecological processes will vary spatially \cite{With2019}. to this, the
importance of scale was already raised decades ago
\cite{Wiens1989,Levin1992,Jelinski1996} and is still of relevance until
today \cite{Simova2012,Estes2018}. Thus, in contrast to many other
sub-disciplines of ecology, landscape ecology emphasizes especially
spatial patterns to a high degree \cite{Risser1984}. Consequently, the
field of landscape ecology relies on software to preprocess, modify,
model, analyze and visualize spatial data.

\hypertarget{sec:open_source}{%
\subsection{Open-source software and R}\label{sec:open_source}}

Software to manage and analyze data becomes increasingly important in
modern scientific research \cite{Wilson2014} and many scientific studies
would not have been possible without open-source software
\cite{Prlic2012}. Open-source software includes all software which is
released under a license that allows to freely use, modify and
distribute the software \cite{St.Laurent2008}. Open-source software
development has many advantages, such as fast innovation, transparency
and reliability as well as longevity, mainly due to many diverse
contributors \cite{vonKrogh2006,St.Laurent2008}. Additionally, the use
of open-source software facilitates (computational) reproducibility and
can allow a better understanding of the methodology
\cite{Prlic2012,Powers2019}. Lastly, open-source software allows other
scientists to reuse code and not ``reinvent the wheel'' \cite{Prlic2012}
and to customize existing software to their specific needs
\cite{Steiniger2009}.

One example of a successful open-source project is the \emph{R}
programming language and its \emph{Comprehensive R Archive Network}
(CRAN) for extensions (also called packages) \cite{RCoreTeam2019}.
Firstly introduced in 1995 \cite{Smith2016}, today the programming
language is among the most popular programming languages, especially in
ecology \cite{Lai2019}. Originally introduced as a statistical
programming language, a growing body of packages designed to analyze
spatial data subsequently emerged for the \emph{R} programming language
\cite{Bivand2006}. This is documented by the growing \emph{CRAN Task
View: Analysis of Spatial Data} \cite{Bivand2019a} and \emph{CRAN Task
View: Handling and Analyzing Spatio-Temporal Data} \cite{Pebesma2020}
that currently list almost 300 packages in total. The growing popularity
of the \emph{R} programming language for spatial data analysis and
landscape ecology can also be seen by the increasing number of related
textbooks \cite{Fletcher2019,Lovelace2019,Pebesma2019a}.

Even though many other open-source tools for landscape ecology exist
\cite{QGISDevelopmentTeam2016,GRASSDevelopmentTeam2017,Porta2017}, in
this review we are going to focus on tools implemented in the \emph{R}
programming. Thus, in the first part we are give a comprehensive
overview over existing \emph{R} packages for landscape ecology. In the
second part, we identify topics for which \emph{R} packages are
currently missing to the best of our knowledge. For more general
overviews see
e.g.~\cite{Jolma2008,Steiniger2009,Steiniger2009a,Istvan2012}.

\hypertarget{sec:existing_packages}{%
\section{Existing packages}\label{sec:existing_packages}}

\hypertarget{basic-spatial-data}{%
\subsection{Basic spatial data}\label{basic-spatial-data}}

\hypertarget{creating-maps}{%
\subsection{Creating maps}\label{creating-maps}}

\hypertarget{spatial-regression}{%
\subsection{Spatial regression}\label{spatial-regression}}

\hypertarget{sec:ecological_analysis}{%
\subsection{Ecological analysis}\label{sec:ecological_analysis}}

\hypertarget{sec:landscape_metrics}{%
\paragraph{Landscape metrics}\label{sec:landscape_metrics}}

One of the most fundamental steps of landscape ecology is to describe
and quantify landscape characteristics \cite{Turner2005,Lausch2015}. For
discrete land cover classes the composition (number and abundance) and
configuration (spatial arrangement) of the landscape is often described
using landscape metrics
\cite{Gustafson1998,Uuemaa2009,Uuemaa2013,Gustafson2019}. These metrics
allow to compare different landscapes, quantify temporal and spatial
landscape changes and investigate interactions between landscape
characteristics and ecological processes \cite{Uuemaa2009}.

The use of landscape metrics was heavily facilitated by the introduction
of the \emph{FRAGSTATS} software \cite{McGarigal2012}, firstly published
in 1995 \cite{Kupfer2012,Gustafson2019}. However, \emph{FRAGSTATS} is
not not open-source software (however it is free to download at the
developers' homepage), which restricts transparency, reproducibility,
and extensibility. To provide a truly open-source solution to calculate
landscape metrics, recently the \emph{landscapemetrics} package
\cite{Hesselbarth2019a} was developed. The package allows to calculate
the most widely used landscape metrics in a transparent and reproducible
workflow within the \emph{R} environment. Additionally, the \emph{belg}
packages allows to calculate the Boltzmann entropy of a landscape
gradient \cite{Nowosad2019a}.

\hypertarget{sec:SDM}{%
\paragraph{Species distribution modeling}\label{sec:SDM}}

Species distribution modeling (SDM) analysis how landscape patterns
(e.g.~habitat suitability, resources availability, etc.) influence and
determine the patterns of species distribution, mainly to infer
ecological processes and predict future species distributions
\cite{Wiersma2011}. Originated in the 1970s, SDM has experienced
numerous methodological advancement and a numerous body of literature
exists today \cite{Zimmermann2010}. Additionally, textbooks introducing
basic concepts of SDM in \emph{R} exists \cite{Guisan2017,Fletcher2019}.

Because the used modeling approaches are diverse
\cite{Hooten2011,Kerr2011,Fletcher2019}, there is also a large number of
\emph{R} packages used for SDMs. Popular approaches and packages include
generalized linear models using, e.g., the \emph{stats} package;
generalized additive models using, e.g., the \emph{mgcv} or \emph{lme4}
package; classification and regression trees (CART) using, e.g., the
\emph{rpart}, \emph{randomForest} or \emph{ranger} package or
multivariate data analysis using , e.g., the \emph{ade4} or \emph{vegan}
package. Of course, also packages specifically designed for SDM exists.
This includes the \emph{dismo}, \emph{sdm}, \emph{ecospat},
\emph{biomod2} and \emph{PresenceAbsence} packages.

\hypertarget{sec:connectivity}{%
\paragraph{Connectivity}\label{sec:connectivity}}

Connectivity is one of the core elements of landscape structure
\cite{Taylor1993} and thus one of the core concepts of landscape ecology
\cite{With2019}. Landscape connectivity describes how landscape
characteristics facilitate or hinder the movement of species
\cite{Tischendorf2000} or other aspects of mobility, such as dispersal,
gene or nutrient flow \cite{With2019}. While structural connectivity
focuses only on landscape characteristics (e.g., movement corridors,
barriers), functional connectivity also includes behavior
characteristics of the species \cite{Tischendorf2000,With2019}.

Given its wide concept, many different measures of connectivity exists
\cite{Kindlmann2008}. On patch level structural connectivity can be
measured using nearest-neighbor distances or characterizations of the
patch neighborhood (e.g.~amount of suitable habitat)
\cite{Kindlmann2008,With2019}. Such measures are provided within the
\emph{landscapemetrics} package (see \ref{sec:landscape_metrics}).
Another way to describe connectivity is based on graph theory with the
advantages that also functional connectivity can be included
\cite{Kindlmann2008}. In graph theory \cite{Laita2011} landscapes are
described by nodes (i.e.~habitat patches) connected by and functional
connections called links \cite{Laita2011}. The \emph{grainscape} package
\cite{Chubaty2020} provides a tool to model connectivity based on
spatially explicit networks. More general, the \emph{igraph} packages
\cite{Csardi2006} provides functionality related to graph theory.
Resistance surfaces and least-cost paths are another tool to model
functional connectivity. The resistance surface describes effects of
facilitating or hindering characteristics of the landscape for an
organism moving within it \cite{Adriaensen2003}. Least-cost paths can be
calculated using the \emph{gdistance} package \cite{vanEtten2017}.
Absorbing Markov chains that combines random walk theory and mortality
based on the landscape characteristics \cite{Fletcher2019a} and is
provided by the recently published \emph{samc} package \cite{Marx2020}.

\hypertarget{sec:landscape_genetics}{%
\paragraph{Landscape genetics}\label{sec:landscape_genetics}}

Landscape genetics investigates how characteristics of landscapes
interact with gene flow, genetic drift and selection \cite{Manel2003}.
Such insights improve our understanding of metapopulation dynamics,
speciation, species' distributions and conservation \cite{Storfer2007}.
By explicitly including characteristics of landscape, landscape genetics
is a way more realistic way of analysis than, e.g., metapopulation
genetics \cite{Holderegger2006}. As a result of its interdisciplinary,
landscape genetics combines methods from different disciplines including
landscape ecology, spatial statistics, geography and population genetics
\cite{Storfer2007}.

Since describing connectivity between two locations is one of the
fundamental steps of landscape genetics, all packages useful for
connectivity (see \ref{sec:landscape_genetics}) are also of importance
for landscape genetics. Further functionality for landscape genetics can
be found in the \emph{graphs4lg} \cite{Savary2020}, \emph{PopGenReport}
\cite{Adamack2014,Gruber2015}, or \emph{HierDpart} packages
\cite{Qin2019}.

\hypertarget{sec:NLM}{%
\paragraph{Neutral landscape models}\label{sec:NLM}}

Neutral landscape models are used to create structured landscapes in the
absence of specific ecological and landscape processes as null models
against which hypotheses including specific ecological and landscape
processes can be tested statistically \cite{Gardner1987,With1997}.
Because neutral landscape models are not based on ecological and
landscape process, many different generic algorithms to create
landscapes can be found (for a comprehensive list, see
\cite{Sciaini2018}).

Currently, to our knowledge, only one \emph{R} packages exists that
allows the use of neutral landscapes. Using a wide collection of
algorithms, the \emph{NLMR} package \cite{Sciaini2018} provides
framework to simulate neutral landscape rasters.

\begin{landscape}

\begin{center}
  \begin{table}
    \begin{tabularx}{0.9\linewidth}{XXXX}
      \caption{Overview of commonly used \textit{R} packages for landscape ecology. Packages are sorted by their major application topic. Only packages especially for spatial data and landscape ecology are included.} \\
      \hline
      Topic & Package & Description & Source \\
      \hline
      \multirow{5}{*}{Spatial data} & \textit{raster} & Methods for raster data & \cite{Hijmans2019} \\
      & \textit{stars} & Methods for spatiotemporal arrays (raster and vector data cubes) & \cite{Pebesma2019} \\
      & \textit{sp} & Methods for mainly vector data & \cite{Pebesma2005,Bivand2013} \\
      & \textit{sf} & Methods for vector data as simple features & \cite{Pebesma2018} \\
      & \textit{landscapetools} & Utility functions for landscape analysis & \cite{Sciaini2018} \\
      \hline
      \multirow{3}{*}{Creating maps} & \textit{tmap} & xxx & xxx \\
      & \textit{mapview} & xxx & xxx \\
      & \textit{leaflet} & xxx & xxx \\
      \hline
      \multirow{2}{*}{Landscape metrics} & \textit{landscapemetrics} & Calculates landscape metrics for categorical land cover maps & \cite{Hesselbarth2019a} \\
      & \textit{belg} & Calculates the Boltzmann entropy of a landscape gradient & \cite{Nowosad2019a} \\
      \hline
      \multirow{5}{*}{}Species distribution modeling (SDM) & \textit{dismo} & xxx & xxx \\
      & \textit{sdm} & xxx & xxx \\
      & \textit{ecospat} & xxx & xxx \\
      & \textit{biomod2} & xxx & xxx \\
      & \textit{PresenceAbsence} & xxx & xxx \\
      \hline
      \multirow{3}{*}{Connectivity} & \textit{grainscape} & xxx & \cite{Chubaty2020} \\
      & \textit{gdistance} & xxx & \cite{vanEtten2017} \\
      & \textit{samc} & xxx & \cite{Marx2020} \\
      \hline
      \multirow{3}{*}{Landscape genetics} & \textit{graphs4lg} & xxx & \cite{Savary2020} \\
      & \textit{PopGenReport} & xxx & \cite{Adamack2014,Gruber2015} \\
      & \textit{HierDpart} & xxx & \cite{Qin2019} \\
      \hline
      Neutral Landscape Models (NLM) & \textit{NLMR} & xxx & \cite{Sciaini2018} \\
      \hline
    \end{tabularx}
  \end{table}
\end{center}

\end{landscape}

\bibliographystyle{spphys}
\bibliography{bibliography.bib}

\end{document}
